===== SOURCE ARTICLE 1 =====

CH. 4 // 
TALK THREE
APRIL 19, 1996
STANFORD LAW SCHOOL
A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as It Relates to Investment Management and Business, Revisited

What I’m going to try to do today is to extend the remarks I made two years ago at the USC Business School. You were assigned a transcript of my USC talk. There’s nothing I said then that I wouldn’t repeat today. But I want to amplify what I said then.

It’s perfectly clear that if Warren Buffett had never learned anything new after graduating from the Columbia Business School, Berkshire would be a pale shadow of its present self. Warren would have gotten rich, because what he learned from Ben Graham138 at Columbia was enough to make anybody rich. But he wouldn’t have the kind of enterprise Berkshire Hathaway is if he hadn’t kept learning.

How do you get worldly wisdom? What system do you use to rise into the tiny top percentage of the world in terms of having sort of an elementary, practical wisdom?

I’ve long believed that a certain system, which almost any intelligent person can learn, works way better than the systems that most people use. As I said at the USC Business School, what you need is a latticework of mental models in your head. And you hang your actual experience and your vicarious experience that you get from reading and so forth on this latticework of powerful models. And with that system, things gradually get to fit together in a way that enhances cognition.

“What you need is a latticework of mental models in your head. And you hang your actual experience and your vicarious experience on this latticework of powerful models. And, with that system, things gradually get to fit together in a way that enhances cognition.”
[Charlie discusses several of the specific mental models elaborated in other talks.]

Your assigned reading for today included the latest annual letters from Jack Welch139 and Warren Buffett relating to General Electric and Berkshire Hathaway, respectively. Jack Welch has a PhD in engineering, and Warren plainly could have gotten a PhD in any field he wanted to pursue. And both gentlemen are inveterate teachers. Worldly wisdom is quite academic when you get right down to it. Look at what General Electric has achieved—and, for that matter, what Berkshire Hathaway has achieved.

Of course, Warren had a professor and mentor, Ben Graham, for whom he had a great affection. Graham was so academic that when he graduated from Columbia, three different academic departments invited him into their PhD programs and asked him to start teaching immediately as part of the PhD program: literature, Greek and Latin classics, and mathematics.

Graham had a very academic personality. I knew him. He was a lot like Adam Smith140—very preoccupied, very brilliant. He even looked like an academic. And he was a good one. And Graham, without ever really trying to maximize the gaining of wealth, died rich—even though he was always generous and spent 30 years teaching at Columbia and authored or coauthored the best textbooks in his field. So I would argue that academia has a lot to teach about worldly wisdom and that the best academic values really work.

Of course, when I urge a multidisciplinary approach—that you’ve got to have the main models from a broad array of disciplines, and you’ve got to use them all—I’m really asking you to ignore jurisdictional boundaries. And the world isn’t organized that way. It discourages the jumping of jurisdictional boundaries. Big bureaucratic businesses discourage it. And, of course, academia itself discourages it. All I can say there is that, in that respect, academia is horribly wrong and dysfunctional.

Some of the worst dysfunctions in businesses come from the fact that they balkanize reality into little individual departments, with territoriality and turf protection and so forth. So if you want to be a good thinker, you must develop a mind that can jump the jurisdictional boundaries. You don’t have to know it all. Just take in the best big ideas from all these disciplines. And it’s not that hard to do.

fig 141
—
JUMP THE JURISDICTIONAL BOUNDARIES
“If you want to be a good thinker, you must develop a mind that can jump the jurisdictional boundaries.”

I might try and demonstrate that point using the card game of contract bridge.143 Suppose you want to be good at declarer play in contract bridge. Well, you know the contract—you know what you have to achieve. And you can count up the sure winners you have by laying down your high cards and your invincible trumps. But if you’re a trick or two short, how are you going to get the other needed tricks? Well, there are only six or so different standard methods. You’ve got long suit establishment. You’ve got finesses. You’ve got throw-in plays. You’ve got crossruffs. You’ve got squeezes. And you’ve got various ways of misleading the defense into making errors. So it’s a very limited number of models. But if you only know one or two of those models, then you’re going to be a horse’s patoot in declarer play. Furthermore, these things interact. Therefore, you have to know how the models interact. Otherwise, you can’t play the hand right.

Similarly, I’ve told you to think forward and backward. Well, great declarers in bridge think, “How can I take the necessary winners?” But they think it through backward, too: “What could possibly go wrong that could cause me to have too many losers?” Both methods of thinking are useful. So in the game of life, get the needed models into your head and think it through forward and backward. What works in bridge will work in life.

That contract bridge is so out of vogue in your generation is a tragedy. China is way smarter than we are about bridge. They’re teaching bridge in grade school now. And God knows the Chinese do well enough when introduced to capitalist civilization. If we compete with a bunch of people who really know how to play bridge when our people don’t, it’ll be just one more disadvantage we don’t need.

Since your academic structure, by and large, doesn’t encourage minds jumping jurisdictional boundaries, you’re at a disadvantage because, in that one sense, even though academia’s very useful to you, you’ve been mistaught. My solution for you is one that I got at a very early age, from the nursery: the story of the Little Red Hen.144 The punch line, of course, is: “‘Then I’ll do it myself,’ said the Little Red Hen.”

So if your professors won’t give you an appropriate multidisciplinary approach—if each wants to overuse his own models and underuse the important models in other disciplines—you can correct that folly yourself. Just because he’s a horse’s patoot, you don’t have to be one too. You can reach out and grasp the model that better solves the overall problem. All you have to do is know it and develop the right mental habits. And it’s kind of fun to sit there and outthink people who are way smarter than you are because you’ve trained yourself to be more objective and multidisciplinary. Furthermore, there’s a lot of money in it—as I can testify from my own personal experience.

[Charlie begins the Coca-Cola business case detailed in Talk Four, “Practical Thought about Practical Thought?,” and discusses the importance of flavor.]

One of my favorite business stories comes from Hershey.145 They get their flavor because they make their cocoa butter in old stone grinders146 that they started with in the 1800s in Pennsylvania. And a little bit of the husk of the cocoa bean147 winds up in the chocolate. Therefore, they get that odd flavor that people like in Hershey’s chocolate.

Hershey knew enough when they wanted to expand into Canada to know they shouldn’t change their winning flavor. Therefore, they copied their stone grinders. Well, it took them five years to duplicate their own flavor. As you can see, flavors can be quite tricky. Even today, there’s a company called International Flavors and Fragrances. It’s the only company I know that does something on which you can’t get a copyright or a patent but which nevertheless receives a permanent royalty. They manage to do that by helping companies develop flavors and aromas in their trademarked products, like shaving cream.148 The slight aroma of shaving cream is very important to consumption. So all of this stuff is terribly important.

“Hershey knew enough when they wanted to expand into Canada to know they shouldn’t change their winning flavor.”
fig 149
—
MICROSOFT
[Continuing the Coca-Cola case study, Charlie explains how our understanding of graphic depictions of mathematical ideas are rooted in biology.]

My friend, Dr. Nat Myhrvold, who’s the chief technology officer at Microsoft, is bothered by this. He’s a PhD physicist and knows a lot of math. And it disturbs him that biology could create a neural apparatus that could do automatic differential equations at fast speed, and yet, everywhere he looks, people are total klutzes at dealing with ordinary probabilities and ordinary numbers.

By the way, I think Myhrvold’s wrong to be amazed by that. The so-called fitness landscape of our ancestors forced them to know how to throw spears, run around, turn corners, and what have you long before they had to think correctly like Myhrvold. So I don’t think he should be so surprised. However, the difference is so extreme that I can understand how he finds it incongruous.

At any rate, mankind invented a system to cope with the fact that we are so intrinsically lousy at manipulating numbers. It’s called the graph. Oddly enough, it came out of the Middle Ages. It’s the only intellectual invention of the monks during the Middle Ages150 I know of that’s worth a damn. The graph puts numbers in a form that looks like motion. So it’s using some of this primitive neural stuff in your system in a way that helps you understand it. So the Value Line151 graphs are very useful.

“Mankind invented a system to cope with the fact that we are so intrinsically lousy at manipulating numbers. It’s called the graph.”

The graph I’ve distributed is on log paper,152 which is based on the natural table of logarithms.153 And that’s based on the elementary mathematics of compound interest, which is one of the most important models there is on earth. So there’s a reason why that graph is in that form. And if you draw a straight line through data points on a graph on log paper, it will tell you the rate at which compound interest is working for you. So these graphs are marvelously useful. I don’t use Value Line’s predictions because our system works better for us than theirs—in fact, a lot better. But I can’t imagine not having their graphs and their data. It’s a marvelous, marvelous product.

[Charlie discusses the importance of trademarks to Coca-Cola’s success and carries it over to a discussion of food products and Carnation.]

Now, when Carnation154 tried to make a deal for its trademark,155 there was this one guy who sold Carnation Fish. So help me God, that was his trade name. Don’t ask me why. And every time they’d say, “We’ll pay you $250,000,” he’d say, “I want $400,000.” And then, four years later, they’d say, “We’ll give you $1 million,” and he’d say, “I want $2 million.” And they just kept doing that all the way through. They never did buy the trademark—at least, they hadn’t bought it the last time I looked.

fig 156
—
CARNATION

In the end, Carnation came to him sheepfacedly and said, “We’d like to put our quality control inspectors into your fish plants to make sure that your fish are perfect, and we’ll pay all the costs,” which he quickly and smirkily allowed. So he got free quality control in his fish plants, courtesy of the Carnation Company.

This history shows the enormous incentive you create if you give a guy a trademark. And this incentive is very useful to the wider civilization. As you see, Carnation got so that it was protecting products that it didn’t even own. That sort of outcome is very, very desirable. So there are some very fundamental microeconomic reasons why even communist countries should protect trademarks. They don’t all do it, but there are very powerful reasons why they should. And, by and large, averaged out around the world, trademark protection has been pretty good.

[Charlie applies various mental models to Coca-Cola.]

However, if you don’t have the basic models and the basic mental methods for dealing with the models, then all you can do is to sit there twiddling your thumbs as you look at the Value Line graph. But you don’t have to twiddle your thumbs. You’ve got to learn 100 models and a few mental tricks and keep doing it all of your life. It’s not that hard. And the beauty of it is that most people won’t do it—partly because they’ve been miseducated. And I’m here trying to help you avoid some of the perils that might otherwise result from that miseducation.

Okay. We’ve been through some of the general ideas in the search for worldly wisdom. And now I want to turn to something even more extreme and peculiar than the talk I’ve already given you. Of all the models that people ought to have in useful form and don’t, perhaps the most important lie in the area of psychology.

“Of all the models that people ought to have in useful form and don’t, perhaps the most important lie in the area of psychology.”

I recently had an instructive experience. I just returned from Hong Kong. I have a pal there who’s a headmaster of one of the leading schools. He gave me this book called The Language Instinct, written by Steven Pinker.158 Well, Pinker is a semanticist professor who rose in the shadow of Noam Chomsky, Linguistics Institute professor at MIT, who is probably the greatest semanticist who ever lived. And Pinker says that human language ability is not just learned—it’s deeply buried, to a considerable extent, in the genome. It’s not in the genome of the other animals, including the chimpanzee,159 to any really useful extent. It’s a gift that came to humans. And Pinker proves his point pretty well. Of course, Chomsky’s already proven it. You have to be pretty ignorant not to realize that a good deal of language ability is right there in the human genome. And even though you have to work like hell to improve it through education, you start with a big leg up in your genes.

Pinker can’t understand why Chomsky—who, again, is such a genius—takes the position that the jury’s still out about why this ability is in the human genome. Pinker, in effect, says, “Like hell, the jury is still out! The language instinct got into humans in exactly the same way that everything else got there—through Darwinian160 natural selection.”161

Well, the junior professor is clearly right, and Chomsky’s hesitation is a little daft. But if the junior professor and I are right, how has a genius like Chomsky made an obvious misjudgment? The answer’s quite clear to me: Chomsky is passionately ideological. He is an extreme egalitarian leftist who happens to be a genius. And he’s so smart that he realized that if he concedes this particular Darwinian point, the implications threaten his leftist ideology. So he naturally has his conclusion affected by his ideological bias. And that gets into another lesson in worldly wisdom: If ideology can screw up the head of Chomsky, imagine what it does to people like you and me.

Ideology does some strange things and distorts cognition terribly. If you get a lot of heavy ideology young, and then you start expressing it, you are really locking your brain into a very unfortunate pattern. And you are going to distort your general cognition.

“If you get a lot of heavy ideology young, and then you start expressing it, you are really locking your brain into a very unfortunate pattern.”

There’s a very interesting history if you take Warren Buffett as an example of worldly wisdom. Warren adored his father,162 who was a wonderful man. But Warren’s father was a very heavy ideologue—right wing, it happened to be—who hung around with other very heavy ideologues—right wing, naturally. Warren observed this as a kid, and he decided that ideology was dangerous and that he was going to stay a long way away from it. And he has throughout his whole life. That has enormously helped the accuracy of his cognition.

I learned the same lesson in a different way. My father hated ideology. Therefore, all I had to do was imitate my father and, thereby, stay on what I regard as the right path. People like [Bob] Dornan163 on the right or [Ralph] Nader164 on the left have obviously gone a little daft. They’re extreme examples of what ideology will do to you—particularly violently expressed ideology. Since it pounds ideas in better than it convinces out, it’s a very dangerous thing to do.

Therefore, in a system of multiple models across multiple disciplines, I should add as an extra rule that you should be very wary of heavy ideology. You can have heavy ideology in favor of accuracy, diligence, and objectivity. But a heavy ideology that makes you absolutely sure that the minimum wage should be raised or that it shouldn’t, and it’s kind of a holy construct where you know you’re right, makes you a bit nuts.

This is a very complicated system. And life is one damn relatedness after another. It’s all right to think that, on balance, you suspect that civilization is better if it lowers the minimum wage or raises it. Either position is okay. But being totally sure on issues like that with a strong, violent ideology, in my opinion, turns you into a lousy thinker. So beware of ideology-based mental misfunctions.

[Charlie laments how poorly the field of psychology deals with incentive-caused bias.]

Another reason that I mentioned Pinker, the semanticist who wrote the book that I told you about earlier, is that at the end of his book, he says, roughly, “I’ve read the psychology textbooks. And they’re daft.” He says, “This whole subject is misorganized and mistaught.”

Well, I have far less in the way of qualifications than Pinker. In fact, I’ve never taken a single course in psychology. However, I’ve come to exactly the same conclusion—that the psychology texts, while they are wonderful in part, are also significantly daft.

In fact, just take simple psychological denial. About three centuries before the birth of Christ, Demosthenes said, “What a man wishes, that also will he believe.” Well, Demosthenes was right.

DEMOSTHENES
“What a man wishes, that also will he believe.”

I had a family acquaintance whose much-loved son, who was brilliant and a star football player, flew off over the ocean and never came back. Well, his mother thought he was still alive. The mind will sometimes flip so that the wish becomes the belief. It will do so at various levels. Individuals vary in how much psychological denial they get. But miscognition from denial overwhelmingly pervades the reality that you’re going to have to deal with. And yet, you won’t find an adequate treatment of simple psychological denial in psychology texts.

So you can’t learn psychology the way your professors teach it. You’ve got to learn everything they teach, but you’ve got to learn a lot more that they don’t teach, because they don’t handle their own subject correctly.

Psychology, to me, as currently organized, is like electromagnetism after [Michael] Faraday167 but before Maxwell168—a lot has been discovered, but no one mind has put it all together in proper form. And it should be done because it wouldn’t be that hard to do—and it’s enormously important.

Just open a psychology text, turn to the index, and look up envy. Well, envy made it into one or two or three of the Ten Commandments. Moses knew all about envy. The old Jews, when they were herding sheep, knew all about envy. It’s just that psychology professors don’t know about envy. Books that thick are teaching a psychology course without envy? And with no simple psychological denial? And no incentive-caused bias?

“Books that thick are teaching a psychology course without envy? And with no simple psychological denial? And no incentive-caused bias?”
fig 169
—
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
“Envy made it into one or two or three of the Ten Commandments. Moses knew all about envy. It’s just that psychology professors don’t know about envy.”

And psychological texts don’t deal adequately with combinations of factors. I told you earlier to be aware of the lollapalooza effect, when two or three or more forces are operating in the same direction. Well, the single most publicized psychology experiment ever done is the Milgram170 experiment, where they asked people to apply what they had every reason to believe was heavy electrical torture on innocent fellow human beings. And they manipulated most of these decent volunteers into doing the torture. [Stanley] Milgram performed the experiment right after Hitler had gotten a bunch of believing Lutherans, Catholics, and so forth to perform unholy acts they should have known were wrong. Milgram was trying to find out how much authority could be used to manipulate high-grade people into doing things that were clearly and grossly wrong. And he got a very dramatic effect. He managed to get high-grade people to do many awful things. But for years, it was in the psychology books as a demonstration of authority—how authority could be used to persuade people to do awful things.

Of course, that’s mere first-conclusion bias. That’s not the complete and correct explanation. Authority is part of it. However, there were also quite a few other psychological principles, all operating in the same direction, that achieved that lollapalooza effect precisely because they acted in combination toward the same end. People have gradually figured that out. And if you read the recent psychology texts at a place like Stanford, you’ll see that they’ve now managed to get it about two-thirds right. However, here’s the main experiment in all of psychology, and even at Stanford, they still leave out some of the important causes of Milgram’s results.

How can smart people be so wrong? Well, the answer is that they don’t do what I’m telling you to do—which is to take all the main models from psychology and use them as a checklist in reviewing outcomes in complex systems.

No pilot takes off without going through his checklist: A, B, C, D… And no bridge player who needs two extra tricks plays a hand without going down his checklist and figuring out how to do it. But these psychology professors think they’re so smart that they don’t need a checklist. But they aren’t that smart. Almost nobody is. Or maybe nobody is. If they used a checklist, they’d realize the Milgram experiment harnesses six psychological principles at least—not three. All they’d have to do is to go down the checklist to see the ones that they missed. Similarly, without this system of getting the main models and using them together in a multi-modular way, you’ll screw up time after time after time, too.

“No pilot takes off without going through his checklist.”

One reason psychology professors so screw up denial is that it’s hard to do demonstrative experiments without conduct forbidden by ethics. To demonstrate how misery creates mental dysfunction in people, think of what you’d have to do to your fellow human beings. And you’d have to do it without telling them about the injury to come. So clearly there are ethical reasons why it’s practically impossible to do the experiments necessary to best lay out the ways human misery creates human mental misfunction.

Most professors solve this problem, in effect, by assuming “If I can’t demonstrate it with my experiments, then it doesn’t exist.” However, obviously, that’s asinine. If something is very important but can’t be perfectly and precisely demonstrated because of ethical constraints, you can’t just treat it like it doesn’t exist. You have to do the best you can with it, with such evidence as is available.

Pavlov172 himself spent the last 10 years of his life torturing dogs. And he published. Thus, we have a vast amount of data about misery-caused mental misfunction in dogs and its correction. Yet it’s in no introductory psychology book that you’ll ever see. I don’t know whether they don’t like the fact that Pavlov tortured dogs or whether B. F. Skinner,173 by overclaiming when he lapsed into his literary mode, made the drawing of implications from animal behavior into human behavior unpopular. However, for some crazy reason or other, the psychology books are grossly inadequate in dealing with misery-caused mental misfunction.

You may say, “What difference does all this psychological ignorance make?” Well, if I’m right, you need these models that are blanked out by this ignorance. And, furthermore, you need them in a form whereby if there are 20 constructs, you have all 20. In other words, you shouldn’t be operating with 10. And you need to use them as a checklist. So you have to go back and put in your own head what I’d call the psychology of misjudgment in a form whereby you have all of the important models and you can use them. And you especially need them when four or five forces from these models come together to operate in the same direction. In such cases, you often get lollapalooza effects—which can make you rich, or they can kill you. So it’s essential that you beware of lollapalooza effects.

There’s only one right way to do it: You have to get the main doctrines together and use them as a checklist. And, to repeat for emphasis, you have to pay special attention to combinatorial effects that create lollapalooza consequences.

“You have to get the main doctrines together and use them as a checklist. And you have to pay special attention to combinatorial effects that create lollapalooza consequences.”
[Charlie discusses the lack of multidisciplinary teaching in the professions, especially how the field of psychology is virtually ignored in academia.]

You can also learn when you’re playing the game of persuasion—for a reputable reason—to combine these forces in a way that makes you more effective. Let me give you an example of that—of wise psychology of yore. In Captain [James] Cook’s174 day, he took these long voyages. At the time, scurvy was the dread of the long voyage. In scurvy, your living gums putrefy in your mouth, after which the disease gets unpleasant and kills you. And being on a primitive sailing ship with a bunch of dying sailors is a very awkward business.

So everybody was terribly interested in scurvy, but they didn’t know about vitamin C. Well, Captain Cook, being a smart man with a multiple-models kind of approach, noticed that Dutch ships had less scurvy than English ships on long voyages. So he said, “What are the Dutch doing that’s different?” And he noticed they had all these barrels of sauerkraut. So he thought, “I’m going on these long voyages, and it’s very dangerous. Sauerkraut may help.” So he laid in all this sauerkraut, which, incidentally, happens to contain a trace of vitamin C.

But English sailors were a tough, cranky, and dangerous bunch in that day. They hated “krauts.” And they were used to their standard food and booze. So how do you get such English sailors to eat sauerkraut?

Well, Cook didn’t want to tell ’em that he was doing it in the hope it would prevent scurvy—because they might mutiny and take over the ship if they thought that he was taking them on a voyage so long that scurvy was likely. So here’s what he did: Officers ate at one place where the men could observe them. And for a long time, he served sauerkraut to the officers but not to the men. And then, finally, Captain Cook said, “Well, the men can have it one day a week.” In due course, he had the whole crew eating sauerkraut.

I regard that as a very constructive use of elementary psychology. It may have saved God knows how many lives and caused God knows how much achievement. However, if you don’t know the right techniques, you can’t use them.

[Charlie discusses psychological effects at play in the marketing of consumer items such as Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble products, Tupperware, etc.]

Worldly wisdom is mostly very, very simple. And what I’m urging on you is not that hard to do if you have the will to plow through and do it. And the rewards are awesome—absolutely awesome. But maybe you aren’t interested in awesome rewards or avoiding a lot of misery or being more able to serve everything you love in life. And if that’s your attitude, then don’t pay attention to what I’ve been trying to tell you, because you’re already on the right track.

It can’t be emphasized too much that issues of morality are deeply entwined with worldly wisdom considerations involving psychology. For example, take the issue of stealing. A very significant fraction of the people in the world will steal if a) it’s very easy to do and b) there’s practically no chance of being caught. And once they start stealing, the consistency principle—which is a big part of human psychology—will soon combine with operant conditioning to make stealing habitual. So if you run a business where it’s easy to steal because of your methods, you’re working a great moral injury on the people who work for you.

“Issues of morality are deeply entwined with worldly wisdom considerations involving psychology.”

Again, that’s obvious. It’s very, very important to create human systems that are hard to cheat. Otherwise, you’re ruining your civilization, because these big incentives will create incentive-caused bias and people will rationalize that bad behavior is okay. Then, if somebody else does it, now you’ve got at least two psychological principles: incentive-caused bias plus social proof. Not only that but you get Serpico176 effects: If enough people are profiting in a general social climate of doing wrong, then they’ll turn on you and become dangerous enemies if you try and blow the whistle. It’s very dangerous to ignore these principles and let slop creep in. Powerful psychological forces are at work for evil.

How does this relate to the law business? Well, people graduate from places like Stanford Law School and go into the legislatures of our nation and, with the best of motives, pass laws that are easily used by people to cheat. Well, there could hardly be a worse thing you could do.

Let’s say you have a desire to do public service. As a natural part of your planning, you think in reverse and ask, “What can I do to ruin our civilization?” That’s easy. If what you want to do is to ruin your civilization, just go to the legislature and pass laws that create systems wherein people can easily cheat. It will work perfectly.

Take the workers’ compensation system in California. Stress is real. And its misery can be real. So you want to compensate people for their stress in the workplace. It seems like a noble thing to do. But the trouble with such a compensation practice is that it’s practically impossible to delete huge cheating. And once you reward cheating, you get crooked lawyers, crooked doctors, crooked unions, etc. participating in referral schemes. You get a total miasma of disastrous behavior. And the behavior makes all the people doing it worse as they do it. So you were trying to help your civilization, but what you did was create enormous damage, net. So it’s much better to let some things go uncompensated—to let life be hard—than to create systems that are easy to cheat.

Let me give you an example: I have a friend who made an industrial product at a plant in Texas not far from the border. He was in a low-margin, tough business. He got massive fraud in the workers’ compensation system, to the point that his premiums reached double-digit percentages of payroll. And it was not that dangerous to produce his product. It’s not like he was a demolition contractor or something.

So he pleaded with the union, “You’ve got to stop this. There’s not enough money in making this product to cover all of this fraud.” But by then, everyone’s used to it. “It’s extra income. It’s extra money. Everybody does it. It can’t be that wrong. Eminent lawyers, eminent doctors, eminent chiropractors—if there are any such things—are cheating.”

And no one could tell them, “You can’t do it anymore.” Incidentally, that’s Pavlovian mere association, too. When people get bad news, they hate the messenger. Therefore, it was very hard for the union representative to tell all of these people that the easy money was about to stop. That is not the way to advance as a union representative.

So my friend closed his plant and moved the work to Utah among a community of believing Mormons. Well, the Mormons aren’t into workers’ compensation fraud—at least they aren’t in my friend’s plant. And guess what his workers’ compensation expense is today? It’s 2 percent of payroll.

This sort of tragedy is caused by letting the slop run. You must stop slop early. It’s very hard to stop slop and moral failure if you let it run for a while.

“You must stop slop early. It’s very hard to stop slop and moral failure if you let it run for a while.”
[Charlie describes his notion of deprival-superreaction syndrome as it relates to gambling and the New Coke debacle of the mid-1980s.]

Of course, as I said before, there is one big consideration that needs huge and special attention as part of any use of techniques deliberately harnessing elementary psychological forces, and that is that once you know how to do it, there are real moral limits regarding how much you should do it. Not all of what you know how to do should you use to manipulate people.

Also, if you’re willing to transcend the moral limits and the person you’re trying to manipulate realizes what you’re doing because he also understands the psychology, he’ll hate you. There is wonderfully persuasive evidence of this effect taken from labor relations, some in Israel. So not only are there moral objections, but there are also practical objections—big ones in some cases.

Audience question: How do you incorporate psychology in your investment decisions? I think it would be more than just picking products that will appeal to everybody, like Coke. After all, there are a lot of smart people out there who obviously think just the way you showed us today. So are you looking for failure in the thinking of other investors when you go about picking successful companies?
What makes investment hard, as I said at USC, is that it’s easy to see that some companies have better businesses than others. But the price of the stock goes up so high that all of a sudden, the question of which stock is the best to buy gets quite difficult. We’ve never eliminated the difficulty of that problem. And 98 percent of the time, our attitude toward the market is that we’re agnostics. We don’t know. Is GM valued properly vis-à-vis Ford? We don’t know.

We’re always looking for something where we think we have an insight that gives us a big statistical advantage. Sometimes it comes from psychology, but often it comes from something else. And we only find a few, maybe one or two a year. We have no system for having automatic good judgment on all investment decisions that can be made. Ours is a totally different system. We just look for no-brainer decisions. As Buffett and I say over and over again, we don’t leap 7-foot fences. Instead, we look for 1-foot fences with big rewards on the other side. So we’ve succeeded by making the world easy for ourselves, not by solving hard problems.

fig 178
—
7-FOOT FENCES
“We just look for no-brainer decisions. As Buffett and I say over and over again, we don’t leap 7-foot fences. Instead, we look for 1-foot fences with big rewards on the other side.”
Based on statistical analysis and insight?
Well, certainly when we do make a decision, we think that we have an insight advantage. And it’s true that some of the insight is statistical in nature. However, again, we find only a few of those. It doesn’t help us merely for favorable odds to exist. They have to be in a place where we can recognize them. So it takes a mispriced opportunity that we’re smart enough to recognize. And that combination doesn’t occur often. But it doesn’t have to. If you wait for the big opportunity and have the courage and vigor to grasp it firmly when it arrives, how many do you need? For example, take the top 10 business investments Berkshire Hathaway’s ever made. We would be very rich if we’d never done anything else—in two lifetimes.

So, once again, we don’t have any system for giving you perfect investment judgment on all subjects at all times. That would be ridiculous. I’m just trying to give you a method you can use to sift reality to obtain an occasional opportunity for rational reaction. If you take that method into something as competitive as common stock picking, you’re competing with many brilliant people. So even with our method, we only get a few opportunities. Fortunately, that happens to be enough.

Have you been successful in creating an atmosphere where people below you can do the same things you’re talking about doing yourself? For example, you talked about the tendency toward commitment and consistency…
Mostly about the terrible mistakes it causes you to make.
How have you created an atmosphere comfortable enough for people to abandon that tendency and admit that they’ve made a mistake? For example, someone here earlier this year from Intel talked about problems that occurred with their Pentium chip.179 One of the most difficult things for them to do was to realize they’d been going about it the wrong way and turn course. And it’s very difficult to do that in a complex structure. How do you foster that?
Intel and its ilk create a coherent culture where teams solve difficult problems on the cutting edge of science. That’s radically different from Berkshire Hathaway. Berkshire is a holding company. We’ve decentralized all the power, except for natural headquarters-type capital allocation.

By and large, we’ve chosen people we admire enormously to have the power beneath us. It’s easy for us to get along with them, on average, because we love and admire them. And they create the culture for whatever invention and reality recognition is going on in their businesses. And included in that reality recognition is the recognition that previous conclusions were incorrect.

But we’re a totally different kind of company. It’s not at all clear to me that Warren or I would be that good at doing what Andy Grove180 does. We don’t have special competence in that field. We are fairly good at relating to brilliant people we love. But we have defects. For example, some regard me as absentminded and opinionated. I might be a mess at Intel. However, both Warren and I are very good at changing our prior conclusions. We work at developing that facility because without it, disaster often comes.

Would you talk a little bit about your seeming predilection away from investing in high-technology stocks, on your own part and the part of Berkshire Hathaway? One of the things I’ve found eye-opening and a little surprising is how the difficulties of running a low-tech business and those of running a high-tech business aren’t all that different.
They’re all hard. But why should it be easy to get rich? In a competitive world, shouldn’t it be impossible for there to be an easy way for everybody to get rich? Of course they’re all hard.

The reason we’re not in high-tech businesses is that we have a special lack of aptitude in that area. And yes—a low-tech business can be plenty hard. Just try to open a restaurant and make it succeed.

“A low-tech business can be plenty hard. Just try to open a restaurant and make it succeed.”
You seem to be suggesting that there’s special aptitude required in high-tech businesses—that they’re harder. But aren’t they equally difficult?
The advantage of low-tech stuff for us is that we think we understand it fairly well. The other stuff we don’t. And we’d rather deal with what we understand. Why should we want to play a competitive game in a field where we have no advantage—maybe a disadvantage—instead of in a field where we have a clear advantage?

Each of you will have to figure out where your talents lie. And you’ll have to use your advantages. But if you try to succeed in what you’re worst at, you’re going to have a very lousy career. I can almost guarantee it. To do otherwise, you’d have to buy a winning lottery ticket or get very lucky somewhere else.

Warren Buffett has said that the investment Berkshire made in an airline was a good example of what not to do. What chain of thinking led to that wrong decision?
We were not buying stock in USAir on the theory that the common shareholders were certain to prosper, because the history of the airline business in terms of taking care of shareholders has been terrible. It was a preferred stock with a mandatory redemption. In effect, we were loaning money to USAir, and we had this equity kicker. We weren’t guessing whether it would be a great place for the shareholders. We were guessing whether it would remain prosperous enough to pay off a credit instrument, carrying a fixed dividend and a mandatory redemption. And we guessed that the business would not get so bad that we’d have a credit threat for which we were not being adequately compensated by the high rate we were getting.

As it happened, USAir went right to the brink of going broke. It was hanging by a thread for several months. It’s since come back. And we’ll probably get all our money back plus the whole coupon. But it was a mistake. [Editor’s note: Berkshire did indeed come out whole on its USAir investment.]

I don’t want you to think we have any way of learning or behaving so you won’t make a lot of mistakes. I’m just saying that you can learn to make fewer mistakes than other people—and how to fix your mistakes faster when you do make them. But there’s no way that you can live an adequate life without making many mistakes. Part of what you must learn is how to handle mistakes and new facts that change the odds. Life, in part, is like a poker game, wherein you have to learn to quit sometimes when holding a much-loved hand.

fig 181
—
POKER GAME
“There’s no way that you can live an adequate life without making many mistakes. Part of what you must learn is how to handle mistakes and new facts that change the odds.”

In fact, one trick in life is to get so you can handle mistakes. Failure to handle psychological denial is a common way for people to go broke. You’ve made an enormous commitment to something. You’ve poured effort and money in. And the more you put in, the more the whole consistency principle makes you think, “Now it has to work. If I put in just a little more, then it’ll work.”

And deprival-superreaction syndrome also comes in: You’re going to lose the whole thing if you don’t put in a little more. People go broke that way because they can’t stop, rethink, and say, “I can afford to write this one off and live to fight again. I don’t have to pursue this thing as an obsession, in a way that will break me.”

Could you talk about the thoughts that went into your decision to swap your Capital Cities stock for Disney rather than taking cash? In the media, it was reported that you mentioned thinking about taking the cash.
Disney’s a perfectly marvelous company, but it’s also very high-priced. Part of what it does is make ordinary movies, which is not a business that attracts me at all. However, part of what Disney has is better than a great gold mine. I mean, those videocassettes… Disney is an amazing example of autocatalysis. They had all those movies in the can. They owned the copyright. And just as Coke could prosper when refrigeration came, when the videocassette was invented, Disney didn’t have to invent anything or do anything except take the thing out of the can and stick it on the cassette. And every parent and grandparent wanted his descendants to sit around and watch that stuff at home on videocassette. So Disney got this enormous tailwind from life. And it was billions of dollars’ worth of tailwind.
“When the videocassette was invented, Disney didn’t have to do anything except take the thing out of the can and stick it on the cassette.”

Obviously, that’s a marvelous model if you can find it. You don’t have to invent anything. All you have to do is to sit there while the world carries you forward.

Disney’s done a lot of new things right. Don’t misunderstand me. But a lot of what happened to Disney was like what a friend of mine said about an ignorant fraternity brother of his who succeeded in life: “He was a duck sitting on a pond. And they raised the level of the pond.”

Eisner and Wells183 were brilliant in how they ran Disney. But the huge tailwind from videocassette sales on all of the old stuff that was there when they came in—that was just an automatic break for the new management. To be fair, they have been brilliant about creating new stuff, like Pocahontas and The Lion King, to catch the same tailwind. But by the time it’s done, The Lion King alone is going to do plural billions. And by the way, when I say “when it’s done,” I mean 50 years from now or something. But plural billions—from one movie?

Could you talk about why you left the law?
I had a huge family. Nancy and I supported eight children. And I didn’t realize that the law was going to get as prosperous as it suddenly got. The big money came into law shortly after I left it. By 1962, I was mostly out, and I was totally out by 1965. So that was a long time ago.

Also, I preferred making the decisions and gambling my own money. I usually thought I knew better than the client anyway. So why should I have to do it his way? So, partly it was having an opinionated personality. And partly it was a desire to get resources permitting independence.

“I preferred making the decisions and gambling my own money. I usually thought I knew better than the client anyway. So why should I have to do it his way?”

Also, the bulk of my clients were terrific, but there were one or two I didn’t enjoy. Plus, I like the independence of a capitalist. And I’d always had sort of a gambling personality. I like figuring things out and making bets. So I simply did what came naturally.

Do you ever gamble Las Vegas–style?
I won’t bet $100 against house odds between now and the grave. I don’t do that. Why should I? I will gamble recreationally with my pals. And I’ll occasionally play a much better bridge player, like Bob Hamman, who might be the best card player in the world. But I know I’m paying for the fun of playing with him. That’s recreational.

As for gambling with simple mechanical house odds against me, why in the world would I ever want to do that, particularly given how I detest the manipulative culture of legalized gambling? I don’t like legalized gambling. And I’m not comfortable in Las Vegas, even though it does now include a higher percentage of wholesome family recreation. I don’t like to be with many of the types who hang around card parlors and so forth.

On the other hand, I do like the manly art of wagering, so to speak. And I like light social gambling among friends. But I do not like the professional gambling milieu.

Could you say something about how the mutual fund and money management business has changed since you got into it, and the growth of capital markets?
Actually, I didn’t really get into it. I had a little private partnership for 14 years, up until a little over 20 years ago. However, I never had enough money from other people to amount to a hill of beans—at least by current investment management standards. So I’ve never really been part of the mutual fund business.

But the money management business has been one of the great growth businesses in the recent history of the United States. It’s created many affluent professionals and multimillionaires. It’s been a perfect gold mine for people who got in it early. The growth of pension funds, the value of American corporations, and the world’s wealth have created a fabulous profession for many and carried lots of them up to affluence. And we deal with them in a variety of ways. However, we haven’t been part of it for many years. We’ve basically invested our own money for a long, long time.

Do you expect this bull run to continue?
Well, I’d be amazed if the capitalized value of all American business weren’t considerably higher 25 years from now. And if people continue to trade with one another and shuffle these pieces of paper around, then money management may continue to be a marvelous business for the managers. But except for what might be called our own money, we’re really not in it.
I was interested in the evolution of your investment strategy from when you first began using the Ben Graham model to the Berkshire Hathaway model. Would you recommend that model to a beginning investor—i.e., dumping most of it or all of it into one opportunity we think is a great one and leaving it there for decades? Or is that strategy really for a more mature investor?
Each person has to play the game given his own marginal utility considerations and in a way that takes into account his own psychology. If losses are going to make you miserable—and some losses are inevitable—you might be wise to utilize a very conservative pattern of investment and saving all your life. So you have to adapt your strategy to your own nature and your own talents.

I don’t think there’s a one-size-fits-all investment strategy that I can give you. Mine works for me. But in part, that’s because I’m good at taking losses. I can take ‘em psychologically. And, besides, I have very few. The combination works fine.

You and Buffett have said that Berkshire’s stock is overvalued and you wouldn’t recommend buying it.
We didn’t say we thought it was overvalued. We just said that we wouldn’t buy it or recommend that our friends buy it at the prices then prevailing. But that just related to Berkshire’s intrinsic value as it was at that time.
If I had the money, I would buy it—because you’ve been saying that your returns will go down for 20 years…
Well, I hope that your optimism is justified. But I do not change my opinion. After all, today we’re in uncharted territory. I sometimes tell my friends, “I’m doing the best I can. But I’ve never grown old before. I’m doing it for the first time, and I’m not sure that I’ll do it right.” Warren and I have never been in this kind of territory—with high valuations and a huge amount of capital. We’ve never done it before. So we’re learning.
“I’ve never grown old before. I’m doing it for the first time, and I’m not sure that I’ll do it right.”
Everything you and Buffett say seems logical. But it sounds like exactly the same language that Ben Graham was using 30 years ago when he was saying the stock market was overvalued, when it was at 900.
Oh, I don’t think that we share that with him. Graham, great though he was as a man, had a screw loose as he tried to predict outcomes for the stock market as a whole. In contrast, Warren and I are almost always agnostic about the market.

On the other hand, we have said that common stocks generally have generated returns of 10 to 11 percent after inflation for many years and that those returns can’t continue for a very long period. And they can’t. It’s simply impossible. The wealth of the world will compound at no such rate. Whatever experience Stanford has had in its portfolio for the last 15 years, its future experience is virtually certain to be worse. It may still be okay. But it’s been a hog-heaven period for investors over the last 15 years. Bonanza effects of such scale can’t last forever.

Berkshire’s annual report got a lot of press for being pessimistic and for expressing concern about the shrinking pool of opportunities as the company gets bigger and bigger. Where does that leave you 10 years from now?
We’ve said over and over that our future rate of compounding our shareholders’ wealth is going to go down compared to our past, and that our size will be an anchor dragging on performance. And we’ve said over and over again that this is not an opinion but a promise.

However, let’s suppose that we were able to compound our present book value at 15 percent per annum from this point. That would not be so bad and would work out okay for our long-term shareholder. I’m just saying that we could afford to slow down some, as we surely will, and still do okay for the long-term shareholder.

By the way, I’m not promising that we will compound our present book value at 15 percent per annum.

You talked about how important it was not to have an extreme ideology. What responsibility, if any, do you think the business and legal communities have for helping inner-city areas, spreading the wealth and so on?
I’m all for fixing social problems. I’m all for being generous to the less fortunate. And I’m all for doing things where, based on a slight preponderance of the evidence, you guess that it’s likely to do more good than harm. What I’m against is being very confident and feeling that you know, for sure, that your particular intervention will do more good than harm, given that you’re dealing with highly complex systems wherein everything is interacting with everything else.
fig 185
—
BEING GENEROUS
“What I’m against is feeling that you know, for sure, that your particular intervention will do more good than harm, given that you’re dealing with highly complex systems wherein everything is interacting with everything else.”
So just make sure that what you’re doing…
You can’t make sure. That’s my point.

On the other hand, I did recently reverse the conclusions of two sets of engineers. How did I have enough confidence in such a complicated field to do that? Well, you might think, “Oh, this guy is just an egomaniac who’s made some money and thinks he knows everything.” Well, I may be an egomaniac, but I don’t think I know everything. But I saw huge reasons in the circumstances for bias in each set of engineers as each recommended a course of action very advantageous to itself. And what each was saying was so consonant with a natural bias that it made me distrust it. Also, perhaps I knew enough engineering to know that what they were saying didn’t make sense. Finally, I found a third engineer who recommended a solution I approved. And thereafter, the second engineer came to me and said, “Charlie, why didn’t I think of that?” Which is to his credit. It was a much better solution, both safer and cheaper.

You must have the confidence to override people with more credentials than you whose cognition is impaired by incentive-caused bias or some similar psychological force that is obviously present. But there are also cases where you have to recognize that you have no wisdom to add and that your best course is to trust some expert. In effect, you’ve got to know what you know and what you don’t know. What could possibly be more useful in life than that?

You discussed Coke’s mistake. Do you have any thoughts about where Apple187 went wrong?

Let me give you a very good answer—one I’m copying from Jack Welch, the CEO of General Electric. He has a PhD in engineering. He’s a star businessman. He’s a marvelous guy. And recently, in Warren’s presence, someone asked him, “Jack, what did Apple do wrong?”

His answer? “I don’t have any special competence that would enable me to answer that question.” And I’ll give you the very same answer. That’s not a field in which I’m capable of giving you any special insight.

On the other hand, in copying Jack Welch, I am trying to teach you something. When you don’t know and you don’t have any special competence, don’t be afraid to say so.

“When you don’t know and you don’t have any special competence, don’t be afraid to say so.”

There’s another type of person I compare to an example from biology: When a bee finds nectar, it comes back and does a little dance that tells the rest of the hive, as a matter of genetic programming, which direction to go and how far. So about 40 or 50 years ago, some clever scientist stuck the nectar straight up. Well, the nectar’s never straight up in the ordinary life of a bee. The nectar’s out. So the bee finds the nectar and returns to the hive. But it doesn’t have the genetic programming to do a dance that says straight up. So what does it do?

Well, if it were like Jack Welch, it would just sit there. But what it actually does is to dance this incoherent dance that gums things up. A lot of people are like that bee. They attempt to answer a question like that. And that is a huge mistake. Nobody expects you to know everything about everything. I try to get rid of people who always confidently answer questions about which they don’t have any real knowledge. To me, they’re like the bee dancing its incoherent dance. They’re just screwing up the hive.

As someone who’s been in legal practice and business, how did you incorporate, or did you incorporate, these models into your legal practice? And how did it work? I suspect many of us have seen law firms that don’t appear to adhere to these kinds of models.
Well, the models are there. But just as there are perverse incentives in academia, there are perverse incentives in law firms. In fact, in some respects, at the law firms, it’s much worse.

Here’s another model from law practice: When I was very young, my father practiced law. One of his best friends, Grant McFayden, Omaha’s Pioneer Ford dealer, was a client. He was a perfectly marvelous man, a self-made Irishman who’d run away uneducated from a farm as a youth because his father beat him. So he made his own way in the world. He was a brilliant man of enormous charm and integrity—just a wonderful, wonderful man.

In contrast, my father had another client who was a blowhard, an overreaching, unfair, pompous, difficult man. And I must have been 14 years old or thereabouts when I asked, “Dad, why do you do so much work for Mr. X, this overreaching blowhard, instead of working more for wonderful men like Grant McFayden?”

My father said, “Grant McFayden treats his employees right, his customers right, and his problems right. And if he gets involved with a psychotic, he quickly walks over to where the psychotic is and works out an exit as fast as he can. Therefore, Grant McFayden doesn’t have enough remunerative law business to keep you in Coca-Cola. But Mr. X is a walking minefield of wonderful legal business.”

This case demonstrates one of the troubles with practicing law. To a considerable extent, you’re going to be dealing with grossly defective people. They create an enormous amount of the remunerative law business. And even when your own client is a paragon of virtue, you’ll often be dealing with gross defectives on the other side or even on the bench. That’s partly what drove me out of the profession. The rest was my own greed, but my success in serving greed partly allowed me to make easier the process of being honorable and sensible. Like Ben Franklin observed, “It’s hard for an empty sack to stand upright.”

I’d argue that my father’s model when I asked him about the two clients was totally correct didaction. He taught me the right lesson. The lesson? As you go through life, sell your services once in a while to an unreasonable blowhard if that’s what you must do to feed your family. But run your own life like Grant McFayden.

That was a great lesson. And he taught it in a very clever way—because instead of just pounding it in, he told it to me in a way that required a slight mental reach. I had to make the reach myself in order to get the idea that I should behave like Grant McFayden. And because I had to reach for it, he figured I’d hold it better. And, indeed, I’ve held it all the way through until today, through all of these decades. That’s a very clever teaching method.

There, again, we’re talking about elementary psychology. It’s elementary literature. Good literature makes the reader reach a little for understanding. Then it works better. You hold it better. It’s the commitment and consistency tendency. If you’ve reached for it, the idea’s pounded in better.

fig 189
—
GOOD LITERATURE
“Good literature makes the reader reach a little for understanding. If you’ve reached for it, the idea’s pounded in better.”

As a lawyer or executive, you’ll want to teach somebody what my father taught me, or maybe you’ll want to teach them something else. And you can use lessons like this. Isn’t that a great way to teach a child? My father used indirection on purpose. And look at how powerfully it worked—like Captain Cook’s wise use of psychology. I’ve been trying to imitate Grant McFayden ever since, for all my life. I may have had a few lapses. But at least I’ve been trying.

At the end of your article in OID, you mentioned that only a select few investment managers actually add value. Since you’re speaking to an audience of future lawyers, what would you encourage us to do in order to be able to add value in our profession?
To the extent you become a person who thinks correctly, you can add great value. To the extent you’ve learned it so well that you have enough confidence to intervene where it takes a little courage, you can add great value. And to the extent that you can prevent or stop some asininity that would otherwise destroy your firm, your client, or something that you care about, you can add great value.
“To the extent you become a person who thinks correctly, you can add great value.”

There are constructive tricks you can use. For example, one reason why my old classmate Joe Flom of Skadden, Arps has been such a successful lawyer is that he’s very good at dreaming up little vivid examples that serve to pound the point home in a way that really works. It’s enormously helpful when you’re serving clients or otherwise trying to persuade someone in a good cause to come up with a little humorous example. The ability to do that is a knack. So you could argue that the Joe Floms of the world are almost born with a gift. But he’s honed the gift. And to one degree or another, all of you were born with the gift, and you can hone it too.

Occasionally, you get into borderline stuff. For instance, suppose you’ve got a client who really wants to commit tax fraud.190 If he doesn’t push the tax law way beyond the line, he can’t stand it. He can’t shave in the morning if he thinks there’s been any cheating he could get by with that he hasn’t done. And there are people like that. They just feel they aren’t living aggressively enough.

You can approach that situation in either of two ways: You can say, “I just won’t work for him,” and duck it. Or you can say, “Well, the circumstances of my life require that I work for him. And what I’m doing for him doesn’t involve my cheating. Therefore, I’ll do it.” And if you see he wants to do something really stupid, it probably won’t work to tell him, “What you’re doing is bad. I have better morals than you.” That offends him. You’re young. He’s old. Therefore, instead of being persuaded, he’s more likely to react with “Who in the hell are you to establish the moral code of the whole world?” But, instead, you can say to him, “You can’t do that without three other people beneath you knowing about it. Therefore, you’re making yourself subject to blackmail. You’re risking your reputation. You’re risking your family, your money,” etc. That is likely to work. And you’re telling him something that’s true.

Do you want to spend a lot of time working for people where you have to use methods like that to get them to behave well? I think the answer is no. But if you’re hooked with it, appealing to his interest is likely to work better as a matter of human persuasion than appealing to anything else. That, again, is a powerful psychological principle with deep biological roots.

I saw that psychological principle totally blown at Salomon. Salomon’s general counsel knew that the CEO, [John] Gutfreund,191 should have promptly told the federal authorities all about Salomon’s trading improprieties, in which Gutfreund didn’t participate and which he hadn’t caused. And the general counsel urged Gutfreund to do it. He told Gutfreund, in effect, “You’re probably not legally required to do that, but it’s the right thing to do. You really should.” But it didn’t work. The task was easy to put off because it was unpleasant. So that’s what Gutfreund did—he put it off.

The general counsel had very little constituency within Salomon except for the CEO. If the CEO went down, the general counsel was going down with him. Therefore, his whole career was on the line. So to save his career, he needed to talk the dilatory CEO into doing the right thing.

It would’ve been child’s play to get that job done right. All the general counsel had to do was to tell his boss, “John, this situation could ruin your life. You could lose your wealth. You could lose your reputation.” And it would have worked. CEOs don’t like the idea of being ruined, disgraced, and fired.

The ex-general counsel of Salomon is brilliant and generous, and he had the right idea. However, he lost his job because he didn’t apply a little elementary psychology. He failed to recognize that what works best in most cases is to appeal to a man’s interest. But you don’t have to get similarly lousy results when you face similar situations. Just remember what happened to Gutfreund and his general counsel. The right lessons are easily learned if you’ll work at it. And if you do learn them, you can be especially useful at crucial moments when others fail. And to the extent that you do become wise, diligent, objective, and especially able to persuade in a good cause, then you’re adding value.

“The right lessons are easily learned if you’ll work at it. And if you do learn them, you can be especially useful at crucial moments when others fail.”
Would you discuss how the threat of litigation—shareholder lawsuits and so forth—and legal complexity in general have affected decision-making in big business?
Well, every big business screams about its legal costs, screams about the amount of regulation, screams about the complexity of its life, screams about the plaintiffs’ bar, particularly the class-action plaintiffs’ bar. So there’s an absolute catechism on that where you could just copy the screams from one corporation to another and you’d hardly have to change a word.

But what causes the screams has, so far, been a godsend for the law firms. The big law firms have had a long updraft. And they now tend to kind of cluck like an undertaker in a plague. An undertaker, of course, would look very unseemly if he were jumping up and down and playing his fiddle during the plague. So law firm partners say, “Oh, isn’t it sad—all this complexity, all this litigation, all this unfairness.”

But, really, they’re somewhat schizophrenic on the subject because it’s been very good for them. Some recent California initiatives created some interesting conduct. Part of the defense bar lobbied quietly against certain propositions and, effectively, against their clients because they didn’t want their clients to catch ’em in the process. And the reason they did so was because it became harder for plaintiffs to bring cases. If you make a living fighting overreaching and it keeps your children in school and somebody proposes a system that eliminates it—well, that’s an adult experience and an adult choice that you have to make.

So big corporations adapt. They have more litigation. They have to have a bigger legal department. They scream about what they don’t like. But they adapt.

But hasn’t that legal complexity consumed a lot more of companies’ resources over the last few decades?
The answer is yes. There’s hardly a corporation in America that isn’t spending more on lawsuits and on compliance with various regulations than it was 20 years ago. And yes, some of the new regulation is stupid and foolish. And some was damn well necessary. And it will ever be thus, albeit with some ebb and flow.
“There’s hardly a corporation in America that isn’t spending more on lawsuits and on compliance with various regulations than it was 20 years ago.”
But have you seen or experienced any change in decision-making at corporations in their being less likely to take on riskier investments for fear of failure or liability?
The only place I saw—with another friend, not Warren—was when I was part owner of the biggest shareholder in a company that invented a better policeman’s helmet. It was made of Kevlar or something of that sort. They brought it to us and wanted us to manufacture it.

As a matter of ideology, we’re very pro-police. I believe civilization needs a police force—although I don’t believe in policemen creating too many widows and orphans unnecessarily either. But we like the idea of a better policeman’s helmet. However, we took one look at it and said to the people who invented it, “We’re a rich corporation. We can’t afford to make a better policeman’s helmet. That’s just how the civilization works. All risks considered, it can’t work for us. But we want the civilization to have these. So we don’t maximize what we sell it for. Get somebody else to make it. Transfer the technology or whatever to somebody who can do it. But we’re not going to.” Thus, we didn’t try to disadvantage policemen from getting new helmets, but we decided not to manufacture helmets ourselves.

There are businesses—given the way the civilization has developed—where being the only deep pocket around is bad business. In high school football, for example, a paraplegic or a quadriplegic will inevitably be created occasionally. And who with deep pockets can the injured person best sue other than the helmet manufacturer? Then everyone feels sorry, the injuries are horrible, and the case is dangerous for the manufacturer. I think big, rich corporations are seldom wise to make football helmets in the kind of civilization we’re in. And maybe it should be harder to successfully sue helmet makers.

“I think big, rich corporations are seldom wise to make football helmets in the kind of civilization we’re in.”

I know two different doctors, each of whom had a sound marriage. When the malpractice premiums got high enough, they divorced their wives and transferred most of their property to their wives. And they continued to practice, only without malpractice insurance. They were angry at the civilization. They needed to adapt. And they trusted their wives. So that was that. And they’ve not carried any malpractice insurance since. People adapt to a changing litigation climate. They have various ways of doing it. That’s how it’s always been and how it’s always going to be.

What I personally hate most are systems that make fraud easy. Probably way more than half of all the chiropractic income in California comes from pure fraud. For example, I have a friend who had a little fender bender, an auto accident, in a tough neighborhood. And he got two chiropractors’ cards and one lawyer’s card before he’d even left the intersection. They’re in the business of manufacturing claims that necks hurt.

In California, I believe the Rand statistics showed that we have twice as many personal injuries per accident as in many other states. And we aren’t getting twice as much real injury per accident. So the other half of that is fraud. People just get so that they think everybody does it and it’s all right to do. I think it’s terrible to let that stuff creep in.

If I were running the civilization, compensation for stress in workers’ comp would be zero—not because there’s no work-caused stress, but because I think the net social damage of allowing stress to be compensated at all is worse than what would happen if a few people who had real work-caused stress injuries went uncompensated.

I like the Navy system. If you’re a captain in the Navy and you’ve been up for 24 hours straight and have to go to sleep, and you turn the ship over to a competent first mate in tough conditions and he takes the ship aground, clearly through no fault of yours, they don’t court-martial you, but your naval career is over.

You can say, “That’s too tough. That’s not law school. That’s not due process.” Well, the Navy model is better in its context than would be the law school model. The Navy model really forces people to pay attention when conditions are tough, because they know that there’s no excuse. Napoleon193 said he liked luckier generals—he wasn’t into supporting losers. Well, the Navy likes luckier captains. It doesn’t matter why your ship goes aground, your career is over. Nobody’s interested in your fault. It’s just a rule that we happen to have, for the good of all, all effects considered.

I like some rules like that. I think that the civilization works better with some of these no-fault rules. But that stuff tends to be anathema around law schools: “It’s not due process. You’re not really searching for justice.” Well, I am searching for justice when I argue for the Navy rule—for the justice of fewer ships going aground. Considering the net benefit, I don’t care if one captain has some unfairness in his life. After all, it’s not like he’s being court-martialed. He just has to look for a new line of work. And he keeps vested pension rights and so on. So it’s not like it’s the end of the world.

So I like things like that. However, I’m in a minority.

I’d like to hear you talk a little bit more about judgment. In your talk, you said we should read the psychology textbooks and take the 15 or 16 principles that are best of the ones that make sense…
The ones that are obviously important and obviously right. That’s correct. And then you stick in the ones that are obviously important and not in the books, and you’ve got a system.
Right. My problem seems to be the prior step, which is determining which ones are obviously right. And that seems to me to be the more essential question to ask.
No, no. You overestimate the difficulty. Do you have difficulty understanding that people are heavily influenced by what other people think and what other people do, and that some of that happens on a subconscious level?
No, I don’t. I understand that.
Well, you can go right through the principles. And one after another, they’re like that. It’s not that hard. Do you have any difficulty with the idea that operant conditioning works—that people will repeat what worked for them the last time?
It just seems to me like there’s a lot of other things out there, as well, that also make a lot of sense. The system would quickly get too complicated, I imagine, as a result of too much cross talk.
Well, if you’re like me, it’s kind of fun for it to be a little complicated. If you want it totally easy and totally laid out, maybe you should join some cult that claims to provide all the answers. I don’t think that’s a good way to go. I think you’ll just have to endure the world, as complicated as it is. Einstein194 has a marvelous statement on that: “Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no more simple.”
fig 195
—
ALBERT EINSTEIN
“If you’re like me, it’s kind of fun for it to be a little complicated.”

I’m afraid that’s the way it is. If there are 20 factors and they interact some, you’ll just have to learn to handle it, because that’s the way the world is. But you won’t find it that hard if you go at it Darwin-like, step-by-step, with curious persistence. You’ll be amazed at how good you can get.

You’ve given us about three of the models that you use. I wondered where you found the other ones. And second, do you have an easier way for us to find them than going through a psychology textbook? I’m not averse to doing that, but it takes longer.
There are a relatively small number of disciplines and a relatively small number of truly big ideas. And it’s a lot of fun to figure it out. Plus, if you figure it out and do the outlining yourself, the ideas will stick better than if you memorize ’em using somebody else’s cram list.

Even better, the fun never stops. I was miseducated horribly, and I hadn’t bothered to pick up what’s called modern Darwinism.196 I do a lot of miscellaneous reading, too. But I just missed it. And in the last year, I suddenly realized I was a total damned fool and hadn’t picked it up properly. So I went back. And with the aid of [Richard] Dawkins—Oxford’s great biologist—and others, I picked it up.

Well, it was an absolute circus for me in my 70s to get the modern Darwinian synthesis in my head. It’s so awesomely beautiful and so awesomely right. And it’s so simple once you get it. So one beauty of my approach is that the fun never stops. I suppose that it does stop eventually when you’re drooling in the convalescent home at the end. But at least it lasts a long time.

If I were czar of a law school—although, of course, no law school will permit a czar; they don’t even want the dean to have much power—I’d create a course that I’d call Remedial Worldly Wisdom that would, among other useful things, include a fair amount of properly taught psychology. And it might last three weeks or a month. I think you could create a course that was so interesting, with pithy examples and powerful examples and powerful principles, that it would be a total circus. And I think that it would make the whole law school experience work better.

People raise their eyebrows at that idea. “People don’t do that kind of thing.” They may not like the derision that’s implicit in the title Remedial Worldly Wisdom. But the title would be my way of announcing, “Everybody ought to know this.” And, if you call it remedial, isn’t that what you’re saying? “This is really basic and everybody has to know it.”

Such a course would be a perfect circus. The examples are so legion. I don’t see why people don’t do it. They may not do it mostly because they don’t want to. But also, maybe they don’t know how. And maybe they don’t know what it is. But the whole law school experience would be much more fun if the really basic ideas were integrated and pounded in with good examples for a month or so before you got into conventional law school material. I think the whole system of education would work better. But nobody has any interest in doing it.

When law schools do reach out beyond traditional material, they often do it in what looks to me like a pretty dumb way. If you think psychology is badly taught in America, you should look at corporate finance. Modern portfolio theory? It’s demented! It’s truly amazing.

“If you think psychology is badly taught in America, you should look at corporate finance. Modern portfolio theory? It’s demented!”

I don’t know how these things happen. Hard science and engineering tend to be pretty reliably done. But the minute you get outside of those areas, a certain amount of inanity seems to creep into academia—even academia involving people with very high IQs. But boy, what a school would be like that pounded a lot of the silliness out. But the right way to pound it out is not to have some 70-plus-year-old capitalist come in and tell seniors, “Here’s a little remedial worldly wisdom.” This is not the way to do it.

On the other hand, a month at the start of law school that really pounded in the basic doctrines… Many of the legal doctrines are tied to other doctrines. They’re joined at the hip. And yet, they teach you those legal doctrines without pointing out how they’re tied to the other important doctrines. That’s insanity—absolute insanity.

Why do we have a rule that judges shouldn’t talk about legal issues that aren’t before them? In my day, they taught us the rule, but not in a way giving reasons tied to the guts of undergraduate courses. It’s crazy that people don’t have those reasons. The human mind is not constructed so that it works well without having reasons. You’ve got to hang reality on a theoretical structure with reasons. That’s the way it hangs together in usable form so that you’re an effective thinker. And to teach doctrines either with no reasons or with poorly explained reasons? That’s wrong.

Another reason why I like the idea of having a course on remedial worldly wisdom is that it would force more sense on the professors. It would be awkward for them to teach something that was contravened by lessons that were obviously correct and emphasized in a course named Remedial Worldly Wisdom. Professors doing so would really have to justify themselves.

Is that a totally crazy idea? It may be crazy to expect it to be done. However, if somebody had done it, would you have found it useful?

I think it would be a wonderful thing to have. Unfortunately, when it’s created, we won’t be here anymore. You’re proposing that this would be good to teach people in a course form so it would be accessible to them. Is there any way that it could be more accessible to us—other than having to …
I get requests for pointers to easy learning all the time. I’m trying to provide a little easy learning today. But one talk like this is not the right way to do it. The right way to do it would be in a book.

I hope what I’m saying will help you be more effective and better human beings. And if you don’t get rich, that won’t bother me. But I’m always asked this question: “Spoon-feed me what you know.” And, of course, what they’re often saying is “Teach me how to get rich with soft white hands faster. And not only let me get rich faster, but teach me faster, too.”

“I’m always asked, ‘Spoon-feed me what you know.’ What they’re often saying is, ‘Teach me how to get rich with soft white hands faster.’”

I don’t have much interest in writing a book myself. Plus, it would be a lot of work for somebody like me to try and do it in my 70s. And I have plenty else to do in life. So I’m not going to do it. But it’s a screaming opportunity for somebody. I’d provide funds to support the writing of an appropriate book if I found someone with the wisdom and the will to do the job right.

Let me turn to some of the probable reasons for present bad education. Part of the trouble is caused by the balkanization of academia. For instance, psychology is most powerful when combined with doctrines from other academic departments. But if your psychology professor doesn’t know the other doctrines, then he isn’t capable of doing the necessary integration. And how would anyone get to be a psychology professor in the first place if he were good with non-psychology doctrines and constantly worked non-psychology doctrines into his material? Such a would-be professor would usually offend his peers and superiors.

There have been some fabulous psychology professors in the history of the world. [Robert] Cialdini of Arizona State was very useful to me, as was B. F. Skinner—for his experimental results, if divorced from his monomania and utopianism. But averaged out, I don’t believe that psychology professors in America are people whose alternative career paths were in the toughest part of physics. And that may be one of the reasons why they don’t get it quite right.

fig 197
—
B. F. SKINNER

The schools of education, even at eminent universities, are pervaded by psychology. And they’re almost an intellectual disgrace. It’s not unheard of for academic departments, even at great institutions, to be quite deficient in important ways. And including a lot of material labeled as psychological is no cure-all. And given academic inertia, all academic deficiencies are very hard to fix.

Do you know how they tried to fix psychology at the University of Chicago? Having tenured professors who were terrible, the president there actually abolished the entire psychology department. And Chicago, in due course, will probably bring back a new and different psychology department. Indeed, by now, it probably has. Perhaps conditions are now better. And I must admit that I admire a college president who will do something like that.

I do not wish to imply in my criticism that the imperfections of academic psychology teaching are all attributable to some kind of human fault common only to such departments. Instead, the causes of many of the imperfections lie deep in the nature of things—in irritating peculiarities that can’t be removed from psychology.

“The causes of many of the imperfections lie deep in the nature of things—in irritating peculiarities that can’t be removed from psychology.”

Let me demonstrate by a thought experiment involving a couple of questions. Are there not many fields that need a synthesizing supermind like that of James Clerk Maxwell but are destined never to attract one? And is academic psychology, by its nature, one of the most unfortunate of all the would-be attractors of superminds? I think the answers are yes and yes.

One can see this by considering the case of any of the few members of each generation who can, as fast as fingers can move, accurately work through the problem sets in thermodynamics, electromagnetism, and physical chemistry. Such a person will be begged by some of the most eminent people alive to enter the upper reaches of hard science.

Will such a super-gifted person instead choose academic psychology, wherein lie very awkward realities: a) that the tendencies demonstrated by social psychology paradoxically grow weaker as more people learn them, and b) that clinical (patient-treating) psychology has to deal with the awkward reality that happiness, physiologically measured, is often improved by believing things that are not true? The answer, I think, is plainly no. The supermind will be repelled by academic psychology, much as Nobel laureate physicist Max Planck198 was repelled by economics, wherein he saw problems that wouldn’t yield to his methods.

We talk a lot about trade-offs between the quality of our life and our professional commitments. Is there time for a professional life, learning about these models, and doing whatever else interests you? Do you find time to do fun things besides learning?
I’ve always taken a fair amount of time to do what I really wanted to do, some of which was merely to fish or play bridge or play golf.

Each of us must figure out his or her own lifestyle. You may want to work 70 hours a week for 10 years to make partner at Cravath and thereby obtain the obligation to do more of the same. Or you may say, “I’m not willing to pay that price.” Either way, it’s a totally personal decision that you have to make by your own lights. But whatever you decide, I think it’s a huge mistake not to absorb elementary worldly wisdom if you’re capable of doing it because it makes you better able to serve others, it makes you better able to serve yourself, and it makes life more fun. So if you have an aptitude for doing it, I think you’d be crazy not to. Your life will be enriched—not only financially, but in a host of other ways—if you do.

“I think it’s a huge mistake not to absorb elementary worldly wisdom if you’re capable of doing it because it makes you better able to serve others, it makes you better able to serve yourself, and it makes life more fun.”

Now, this has been a very peculiar talk for some businessman to come in and give at a law school—some guy who’s never taken a course in psychology telling you that all of the psychology textbooks are wrong. This is very eccentric. But all I can tell you is that I’m sincere. There’s a lot of simple stuff that many of you are quite capable of learning. And your lives will work way better, too, if you do. Plus, learning it is a lot of fun. So I urge you to learn it.

Are you, in effect, fulfilling your responsibility to share the wisdom that you’ve acquired over the years?
Sure. Look at Berkshire Hathaway. I call it the ultimate didactic enterprise. Warren’s never going to spend any money. He’s going to give it all back to society. He’s just building a platform so people will listen to his notions. Needless to say, they’re very good notions. And the platform’s not so bad either. But you could argue that Warren and I are academics in our own way.
Most of what you’ve said is very compelling. And your quest for knowledge and, therefore, command of the human condition and money are all laudable goals.
I’m not sure the quest for money is so laudable.
Well then, understandable.
That I’ll take. I don’t sneer, incidentally, at making sales calls or proofreading bond indentures. If you need the money, it’s fun earning it. And if you have to try a bunch of cases in the course of your career, you’ll learn something doing that. You ought to do something to earn money. Many activities are dignified by the fact that you earn money.
I understand your skepticism about overly ideological people. But is there an ideological component to what you do? Is there something that you’re irrationally passionate about?
Yeah, I’m passionate about wisdom. I’m passionate about accuracy and some kinds of curiosity. Perhaps I have some streak of generosity in my nature and a desire to serve values that transcend my brief life. But maybe I’m just here to show off. Who knows?
“Perhaps I have some streak of generosity in my nature and a desire to serve values that transcend my brief life. But maybe I’m just here to show off. Who knows?”

I believe in the discipline of mastering the best that other people have ever figured out. I don’t believe in just sitting down and trying to dream it all up yourself. Nobody’s that smart.

===== SOURCE ARTICLE 2 =====

CH. 4 // 
TALK THREE
, REVISITED
STANFORD LAW SCHOOL
Talk Three
—Revisited

When I gave Talk Three in 1996, I argued that intense political animosity should be avoided because it causes much mental malfunction, even in brilliant brains. Since then, political animosity has increased greatly, both on the left and the right, with sad effects on the ability of people to recognize reality, exactly as I would have expected.

Naturally, I don’t like this result. The grain of my emotional nature is to respond as Archimedes might respond if he complained now to God, “How could you put in those Dark Ages after I published my formulas?” Or as Mark Twain once complained, “These are sad days in literature. Homer is dead. Shakespeare is dead. And I myself am not feeling at all well.”

Fortunately, I am still able to refrain from complaint in the mode of Mark Twain. After all, I never had more than a shred of an illusion that any views of mine would much change the world. Instead, I always knew that aiming low was the best path for me, so I merely sought 1) to learn from my betters a few practical mental tricks that would help me avoid some of the worst miscognitions common in my age cohort, and 2) to pass on my mental tricks only to a few people who could easily learn from me because they already almost knew what I was telling them.

Having pretty well accomplished these very limited objectives, I see little reason to complain now about the un-wisdom of the world. Instead, what works best for me in coping with all disappointment is what I call the Jewish method: humor.

fig 201
—
MARK TWAIN
“These are sad days in literature. Homer is dead. Shakespeare is dead. And I myself am not feeling at all well.”

As I revisit Talk Three in March 2006, I still like its emphasis on the desirability of making human systems as cheating-proof as is practicable, even if this leaves some human misery unfixed. After all, the people who rewarded cheating on a massive scale leave a trail of super-ruin in their wake, since the bad conduct spreads by example and is so very hard to reverse.

And I fondly recall Talk Three’s emphasis on both the life-handling lessons I learned from my father’s friend, Grant McFayden, and one teaching method I learned from my father. I owe a lot to these long-dead predecessors, and if you like Poor Charlie’s Almanack, so do you.
